None energised Urdinna, when ingested can lead to temporarily paralysis, and sometimes even organ failure.
Suntsiezzinakk comes in many forms and varieties, the Eastern University being an example of the wooden variation of the substance.
Professor Leunak theorises that the gods aren't god's at all, but simply normal people who lead the construction of all the great structures dotted about the land. If it wasn't for his generous patronage and his standing within the scientific community, he would be an ex-professor.
The Eastern University has done exactly 6 expeditions into its nearby crevice. None have returned...only Throbabeth knows whats down there...
Indarrtsua, when in its liquid state, becomes a perfect mirror. Makes for a rather pretty smelting and refining process.
With its fast growth and ability to grow almost anywhere, Larranjaa cultivation needs to be heavily controlled. It's been known to take over entire regions when allowed to grow unimpeded.
The brightness, detection range and "on" duration of Zurria is determined by it's cut and size.
Jarran is a strong alcoholic beverage made from the fruit of the Larranja tree. The inventor, a monk called Drag, claimed that the process of fermenting the fruit came not through the use of Irudiimenaa but from a near death experience he had.
I've had a look at some of the stuff Vantime created later in his life...I have to say, he certainly had some "creative" ideas...
Professor Van Vague has done some fascinating research into the history of our civilization. By cross referencing old texts, folktales and myths, he hypothesizes that all our nations can trace their ancestry back to people who migrated up from the south about 500 years ago.
How long Irudiimenaa lasts can vary wildly per person, some have claimed a kg to last an entire day, others have had it only last a few hours...at the end of the day, it's all about self control.
It is theorized that the reason the lands south of the wall are so wet, are due to the sheer size of said wall. That its sheer height somehow causes the rainfall.
The most popular method of taking Irudiimenaa is smoking, as chewing leads to purple stained lips and teeth, while snorting leads to stained nostrils. All three however tend to lead to bad breath.
To the disappointment of many, pikkantea does not have a liquefying effect on itself.
Spending hours a day driving a sandship or landship's wheels by hand is quite the workout...for this reason crankmen are known for being strong and reliable warriors.
Irudiimenaa spoils and loses its mind freeing effects after about a week, although with some luck and if stored in a cool and dry place it can last up to a month on a stretch.
In colder, more temperate regions, horria is found almost everywhere. Sparkling away in the dirt, the cliffs, even as annoying imperfections in ore. However, as you go to hotter climates, it becomes less and less common. Due to this, it's quite a rare find in the west.
Sand storms, especially out on the ocean are vicious things. There are stories of sandships having their hulls cut apart by the more vicious ones.
The Western University's Language Society (WULS) has a pass time of inventing new swear words, a few of them have even been officially added to the Universal University Dictionary and are used by students and faculty alike..
The Western and Eastern Universities have a fierce sports rivalry, with the Western one having won every game of pikkantea ball and larranjaa split so far.
There are sometimes strange, eerie noises coming from the other side of the wall. These stories are added upon by the strange lights that are often seen from the other side of the crevice west of the wall. There are rumors that there are...things over there..
Draggists still continue to cling onto the claim that their Jarran is true stuff, fermented in just the right way. They've even been known to raid breweries if they don't pay them a special fee for the rights to make and sell the drink.
Every student of a University is taught basic self defense with a weapon of their choice in their two years...it's an important skill to have, especially if they become a teacher.
Beltzza clumped together has proved to be very volatile; it has a habit of accumulating an abundance of charge within itself.
There are old folk tales in the east that talk about an ancient empire atop the wall. Of course, the modern scientific community laugh at the idea, how would they grow crops, breath even...that thing stretches far above the clouds. But still, every now and then there are reports of a broken pot or item at the foot of the wall...hoaxes...surly.
Pikkantea is a staple addition to every sandfarers diet. As the plain food and long hot days in the sun's often lead to having less then smooth bowel movements. It also makes the food slightly more bearable...
Ironically, rainstorms are the real killers at sea. The rain reduces the buoyant properties of larranjaa rubber significantly. Best case scenario, you get stuck for the duration of the rainstorm, worst case scenario (And the more common one) your sandship sinks beneath the dunes...
Water mixed with seasand is a deathtrap. The seasand goes from a dense, slow moving liquid like substance to almost like water...and with it loses all it's buoyancy, both for people and more importantly, sandships. River mouths, wetpatches and rainstorms are particularly dangerous hazards when at sea.
Wetpatches, or more commonly sinkplateaus are flat, calm, usually dark patches of sea which are soaked full of water. They have a mixed reputation, for one, they can be glorious oasis' in the ocean, saving crews from the brink of death and topping up water stocks. However, they are also notoriously hard to spot, track, and can appear and disappear without warning...which is incredibly dangerous when you consider the dangers of wet seasand. Many sandships have been lost to the dunes by accidentally entering a sinkplateau.
Sandbergs are large chunks of sandstone which float about at the surface of the ocean, they tend to show up after storms. A bunch of big wigs at the eastern university have a bunch of theories about how their made and how they float...all of them contradicting each other.